content/2017-12-04_async_for.md, before:

Title: Using async for loops in Python
Date: 2017-12-04T09:00:00+04:00
Category: Logiciel

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/vitroids/3166217513/"><img title="Loop! - Masakazu Matsumoto - https://www.flickr.com/photos/vitroids/3166217513/" src="{filename}/images/async_for_loop.jpg" style="float: right; max-width: 50%; max-height: 300px; height: auto; padding: 0 1em 1em" /></a>

asyncio has brought support for asynchronous I/O with an event loop to
Python 3. Initially, it was just a module built on top of the `yield`
keyword used with generators. This changed with the release of Python
3.5 which introduced the `async` and `await` keywords, allowing to
turn this Python 3.4 code:

    :::python3
    @asyncio.coroutine
    def get(self, *args, **kwargs):
        yield from self.wait_for_token()
        return self.client.get(*args, **kwargs)

into this Python 3.5 code:

    :::python3
    async def get(self, *args, **kwargs):
        await self.wait_for_token()
        return self.client.get(*args, **kwargs)

So that's a nice incremental improvement! But Python 3.5 also brought
support for asynchronous context managers (`async with`) and
asynchronous loops (`async for`). I believe those two also deserve to
be known and used! Indeed, they add real expressive power that is
difficult to achieve in Python 3.4. In this post, I'm going to focus on
`async for`.

Indeed, when I started looking for information about asynchronous
loops, the information I saw was confusing. I typed `python async for`
in a search engine, and the top result was [PEP
492](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0492/), which gives way too
much detail for users of the feature, and is only considering Python
3.5 which complicates the situation as we will see below. But if you
can use Python 3.6 or above, you're in luck! Asynchronous loops will
be much easier to use.

## Python 3.6+

`async for` loops are a natural extension of the usual loops in
Python. Let's use the example of a paginated HTTP API that returns
documents page after page. Here's how a usual synchronous for loop
would work:

    :::python3
    def get_docs():
        page = fetch_page()
        while page:
            for doc in page:
                yield doc
            page = fetch_page()

    for doc in get_docs():
        pass  # work on doc

Now, an *asynchronous* for loop will be really similar. As usual with
asyncio you just need to add the async/await keywords at the right
place:

    :::python3
    async def get_docs():
        page = await fetch_page()
        while page:
            for doc in page:
                yield doc
            page = await fetch_page()

    async for doc in get_docs():
        pass  # work on doc

And that's it! Your code is now asynchronous. There's nothing magic,
it's just a loop over the results yielded by `get_docs`. The order of
execution is the same as in the asynchronous case, except that during
`await` calls, other unrelated code can execute.

(Note that in the real world you could have a `fetch_all_pages`
generator that would fetch pages one by one, which would simplify the
implementation of `get_docs`. But as an example it would be more
confusing since we would have an `async for` loop in `get_docs`
too.)

## Python 3.5

However, you may be stuck with Python 3.5, for example if you only use
the Python versions provided by Ubuntu 16.04 LTS. Or you want to
understand how asynchronous iterators work under the hood.

In Python 3.5, you cannot use `yield` in an `async` function. Indeed,
`async` function were initially implemented using `yield` in Python
3.4, and this limitation was only removed in Python 3.6. So the above
code is not going to work. Instead, you need to reimplement `get_doc`
using a class, which is more low level, more complicated and more
verbose. Here's what it looks like:

    :::python3
    import collections

    class AsyncGetDocs:
        def __init__(self):
            self.buffer = collections.deque()

We need to store the results of the `fetch_page` code in a buffer in
order to be able to return them one by one when needed. To preserve
the order, we need a last-in first-out (LIFO) queue, which can easily
be implemented with `collections.deque` in Python.

    :::python3
        def __aiter__(self):
            return self

`async for` loops use the `__aiter__` protocol: they need an object
with an `__aiter__` method. The object return by `__aiter__` should
have an `__anext__` method that will return the objects one by one:

    :::python3
        async def __anext__(self):
            if not self.buffer:
                await self._prefetch()
                if not self.buffer:
                    raise StopAsyncIteration
            return self.buffer.popleft()

If the buffer is empty, we try to fill it. If it's still empty, this
is the end of the loop, so we stop the iteration.

Now, if the buffer is not empty, we can fetch the last value that was
added to it (remember that we're treating our buffer as a queue.) We
only have the `_prefetch` method left:

    :::python3
        async def _prefetch(self):
            for doc in await fetch_page():
                self.buffer.append(doc)

Woah! A lot of boilerplate.

And if you're still using Python 3.4, well, what are you waiting for
to upgrade?

If you liked this post, you might like:

 * [How do you rate limit calls with aiohttp?](https://quentin.pradet.me/blog/how-do-you-rate-limit-calls-with-aiohttp.html)
 * [How do you limit memory usage with asyncio?](https://quentin.pradet.me/blog/how-do-you-limit-memory-usage-with-asyncio.html)

<!-- vim: spelllang=en
-->

Commit message:

async_for: Add async_generator version
Thanks to @njsmith for writing the library and mentioning it in the
comments.

content/2017-12-04_async_for.md, after:

Title: Using async for loops in Python
Date: 2017-12-04T09:00:00+04:00
Category: Logiciel

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/vitroids/3166217513/"><img title="Loop! - Masakazu Matsumoto - https://www.flickr.com/photos/vitroids/3166217513/" src="{filename}/images/async_for_loop.jpg" style="float: right; max-width: 50%; max-height: 300px; height: auto; padding: 0 1em 1em" /></a>

asyncio has brought support for asynchronous I/O with an event loop to
Python 3. Initially, it was just a module built on top of the `yield`
keyword used with generators. This changed with the release of Python
3.5 which introduced the `async` and `await` keywords, allowing to
turn this Python 3.4 code:

    :::python3
    @asyncio.coroutine
    def get(self, *args, **kwargs):
        yield from self.wait_for_token()
        return self.client.get(*args, **kwargs)

into this Python 3.5 code:

    :::python3
    async def get(self, *args, **kwargs):
        await self.wait_for_token()
        return self.client.get(*args, **kwargs)

So that's a nice incremental improvement! But Python 3.5 also brought
support for asynchronous context managers (`async with`) and
asynchronous loops (`async for`). I believe those two also deserve to
be known and used! Indeed, they add real expressive power that is
difficult to achieve in Python 3.4. In this post, I'm going to focus on
`async for`.

Indeed, when I started looking for information about asynchronous
loops, the information I saw was confusing. I typed `python async for`
in a search engine, and the top result was [PEP
492](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0492/), which gives way too
much detail for users of the feature, and is only considering Python
3.5 which complicates the situation as we will see below. But if you
can use Python 3.6 or above, you're in luck! Asynchronous loops will
be much easier to use.

## Python 3.6+

`async for` loops are a natural extension of the usual loops in
Python. Let's use the example of a paginated HTTP API that returns
documents page after page. Here's how a usual synchronous for loop
would work:

    :::python3
    def get_docs():
        page = fetch_page()
        while page:
            for doc in page:
                yield doc
            page = fetch_page()

    for doc in get_docs():
        pass  # work on doc

Now, an *asynchronous* for loop will be really similar. As usual with
asyncio you just need to add the async/await keywords at the right
place:

    :::python3
    async def get_docs():
        page = await fetch_page()
        while page:
            for doc in page:
                yield doc
            page = await fetch_page()

    async for doc in get_docs():
        pass  # work on doc

And that's it! Your code is now asynchronous. There's nothing magic,
it's just a loop over the results yielded by `get_docs`. The order of
execution is the same as in the asynchronous case, except that during
`await` calls, other unrelated code can execute.

(Note that in the real world you could have a `fetch_all_pages`
generator that would fetch pages one by one, which would simplify the
implementation of `get_docs`. But as an example it would be more
confusing since we would have an `async for` loop in `get_docs`
too.)

## Python 3.5

However, you may be stuck with Python 3.5, for example if you only use
the Python versions provided by Ubuntu 16.04 LTS. Or you want to
understand how asynchronous iterators work under the hood.

In Python 3.5, you cannot use `yield` in an `async` function. Indeed,
`async` function were initially implemented using `yield` in Python
3.4, and this limitation was only removed in Python 3.6. So the above
code is not going to work. Instead, you need to reimplement `get_doc`
using a class, which is more low level, more complicated and more
verbose. Here's what it looks like:

    :::python3
    import collections

    class AsyncGetDocs:
        def __init__(self):
            self.buffer = collections.deque()

We need to store the results of the `fetch_page` code in a buffer in
order to be able to return them one by one when needed. To preserve
the order, we need a last-in first-out (LIFO) queue, which can easily
be implemented with `collections.deque` in Python.

    :::python3
        def __aiter__(self):
            return self

`async for` loops use the `__aiter__` protocol: they need an object
with an `__aiter__` method. The object return by `__aiter__` should
have an `__anext__` method that will return the objects one by one:

    :::python3
        async def __anext__(self):
            if not self.buffer:
                await self._prefetch()
                if not self.buffer:
                    raise StopAsyncIteration
            return self.buffer.popleft()

If the buffer is empty, we try to fill it. If it's still empty, this
is the end of the loop, so we stop the iteration.

Now, if the buffer is not empty, we can fetch the last value that was
added to it (remember that we're treating our buffer as a queue.) We
only have the `_prefetch` method left:

    :::python3
        async def _prefetch(self):
            for doc in await fetch_page():
                self.buffer.append(doc)

Woah! A lot of boilerplate.

## Python 3.5 + async_generator

Alternally, you can have something close to the Python 3.6 version
using the third-party [async_generator
library](https://github.com/njsmith/async_generator) which allows you
to write:

    :::python3
    from async_generator import async_generator, yield_

    @async_generator
    async def get_docs():
        page = await fetch_page()
        while page:
            for doc in page:
                await yield_(doc)
            page = await fetch_page()

    async for doc in get_docs():
        pass  # work on doc

This is much closer to the Python 3.6 version! Thanks to Nathaniel J.
Smith for having 1/ written the library and 2/ mentioned it in the
comments!

Finally, if you're still using Python 3.4, well, what are you waiting
for to upgrade?

If you liked this post, you might like:

 * [How do you rate limit calls with aiohttp?](https://quentin.pradet.me/blog/how-do-you-rate-limit-calls-with-aiohttp.html)
 * [How do you limit memory usage with asyncio?](https://quentin.pradet.me/blog/how-do-you-limit-memory-usage-with-asyncio.html)

<!-- vim: spelllang=en
-->
